Today I want to share the number one ranking factor for AI search. 
And no, it is not just SEO. So you've probably seen that floating around that if you just do good SEO, you're going to perform really well in AI search. 
That is true sometimes. I'm going to show you scenarios where that is true. 
But there's also many other scenarios where that is actually not true. 
And there's something that matters way more than anything else. So let's dive right into it. So what we're looking at here is actually the results from HubSpot. 
So HubSpot's going to be the example that I'm going to be showing today. And on the left hand side, we can see HubSpot performs exceptionally well across almost every AI platform. 
Okay, so they show up almost every single time. 
Do that you search anything related to best CRM. Okay, that's that core seed. They show up a lot. 
All right, then we look over here though. This is where things start to get really fascinating. 
You can see traditional search rankings, they do very well there, but then they do really well on AI mentions. 
and then once again invisible in AI citations. So why what is this weird disconnect going on? How can they be doing so well as far as getting their brand mentioned in AI answers but they're they're not showing up basically as an AI citation at all. 
So this I would argue is 100 times more important for your AI visibility than only doing SEO on your website. So let's talk about it which is is your brand mentioned on the core sources of retrieval. 
Okay, so what we're looking at here, these are the AI citations I pulled for one single keyword phrase, which is best CRM. 
Ran that across all the AI platforms, and we're able to see extract all the citations from all of those AI answers across all the platforms. And then what we do is we go and we scan all of these pages that are showing up as the core citations and we see is that brand actually mentioned there. 
And the crazy part is that HubSpot was actually their own domain, wasn't even one of those citations. But this is where things get really fascinating is among all of these citation sources, HubSpot is mentioned 89% of the time. 
That means out of these, I think there about 50 citations we extracted just for this one particular query. But that means they showed up on these citation sources 89% of the time. Okay, this is what influences the AI answers. 
If your brand continually shows up on the core sources of retrieval, you are almost guaranteed to show up in the AI answers. It's really not magic. It is actually that simple. Okay? And we can see this. There's actual data to prove this. 89% brand coverage on the citations. 
Okay. But here's where things get really fascinating. This is where we get a little bit different compared to what the how things used to be with SEO is 72% of the brand mentions are unlin. Okay? Okay, so we can go back and look at this. 
HubSpot is being mentioned on these pages, but they're not even getting a link and it's still influencing the AI. We know that this is true. And in fact, it's so extreme that you don't even need a link. But let's say you do have a link. That link can be no follow. 
It can be sponsored. It could have the sponsor tag on it. It doesn't make a difference. AI doesn't discriminate when it comes to this. So once again, this proves that it's about getting your brand covered on those core sources of retrieval. 
So, I'll show you how you can do this here in a second, but this is the most important takeaway this whole video. Let's say you're an OHubspot and you're not performing at this level, okay? And you want to you're a brand new business. You want to start getting more coverage in AI answers. 
There's actually a formula you can use. You just extract the citations for your most important commercial keywords and then you that becomes your prospect list. 
Okay? So, when you're looking at this, normally if it's a brand new business, opportunities over here would be quite wide, right? you have a lot of opportunities because you likely don't have brand coverage on any of the citations. 
So then we're going to de develop a plan and we're going to try to get our brand mentioned on these core sources of retrieval. 
Okay, couple kind of little nuances here. The first thing is obviously HubSpot is competing in one of the most competitive industries on the internet, which is CRM. Highly competitive, tons of capital being deployed in this industry. HubSpot is a billion-dollar business. 
There's just a lot of money flowing in here. There's a lot of competition. So, what we have found when we have studied AI answers and AI citations over and over that in high competition verticals, earned media is even more important. Okay? 
You can do really well with your owned assets, your website, your YouTube channel, your ex, LinkedIn, whatever it is. You could be absolutely crushing it. And yes, it you can be used as a source of retrieval, but at the end of the day, you're just one. you are just one source of retrieval. 
The AI is not just going to pick one, right? That's not the way that these platforms work. When retrieval is used, they are retrieving. They are going and finding many different sources, many. And sometimes it can be 10, sometimes it could be a hundred just depending on which thinking model you're using. 
But for high competition verticals, your focus on earned media has to be the like almost all of your attention has to be focused on getting the brand mention on third party sources. Right? That simple as that. Now, as we progress down the competition ladder, we see that earned media becomes slightly less important and your owned assets can actually assert more influence on the AI platforms. We have seen this over and over. 
And then as we progress down even further to low competition, it actually the equilibrium kind of gets centered. So we have earned media and owned assets with equal levels of influence. And the reason is and this is just based on data, right? When we look at local queries, local commercial queries. So we're talking best plumbers in Chesterfield, Missouri. You'll often find that the actual businesses that are competing in, let's say, Chesterfield, they tend to be used as a source of retrieval quite often. 
And it's not these earned media outlets that are winning in those citations. Like I said, it's based on competition. So higher competition, much more focus on third party earned media. As we go middle, now we can start to we can still leverage our owned assets a lot more. And then low competition, do both, right, in equal amounts. So it is okay to continue to focus on your website, your brand, your owned assets. You can get great effects from doing that. 
But this is not new and offsite has always mattered more than on-site. And I've seen this be the case prior to AI platforms being here. So I've conducted hundreds and hundreds of SEO audits over the last decade of doing this. And I can tell you that when we do these audits, more times than not, when there's a lack of performance, you can almost always just begin by looking off site before you even look at the site. And more times than not, they have poor backlinks, really low quality, or they literally just lack back links altogether. 
They have a really weak anchor text profile, really weak backlink profile, and so they're not able to perform the way that they need to because they just lack the external signals that actually build trust. You can focus on your website all day and write content all day and say you're the best, but it is not going to influence these platforms. Okay? Especially as that competition ladder climbs, the less your brand is going to be able to influence the AI. Okay? So, it's very important that when you begin any SEO campaign, any AI SEO campaign, AEO, GEO, whatever you want to call it. Okay? 
Your goal is to influence the AI platforms. Your goal is to get your brand in the AI answers. If that's your goal, then you have to really begin frontloading your offsite work. Okay? Don't leave that on later for 3, four, 6 months later into the campaign. You need to begin doing off-site work from day one. Day one, you begin that process of marketing your brand. Okay? It is that simple, but it is definitely not easy. Okay? And we need to stop doing random link building. 
All right? So, there is a time and place to continue to do traditional link building to grow your site authority. that still matters because obviously if you want your website to be one of those core sources of retrieval, you need to probably rank well in traditional search. 
And to rank well in traditional search, backlinks are one of the most important ranking factors. So this still matters, right? You should still keep doing it, but you need to layer in the focus on citations. You need to extract all those citations and you need to make those your prospects even if no links are even involved. Okay? Just getting your brand mentioned. So like I mentioned this is simple but not easy. What I'm describing it is very simple. It is proven to work but the execution is where things get a little bit tricky. 
So number one you want to identify commercial topics. Okay commercial topics. Don't doformational topics. If you try to runformational queries in AI platforms you're just you're not going to see a lot of brands popping up. So you got to focus on the commercial query. So in this particular example that I showed earlier, best CRM is that core seed. So you can build out prompts related to that core seed and then run those in the AI platforms. Okay. 
Then what you're going to do is you're going to look at the AI answers. We're going to create AI answers across chat GBT, Google's AI mode, Google AI overviews, Google Gemini, Perplexity, Grock, Claude, all of them. Okay? all platforms you should do it because they all produce slightly different answers and they all produce different citations. 
You will see some citations duplicated across many of these platforms, but a lot of the time you're going to get a really diverse mix of citations, which is exactly what you want. Then from there, you build this whole bucket of citations, put them into a Google sheet, and then you want to start to build a marketing plan for the top citations. 
So look at the citations that are used across almost all these AI platforms. So if you see one pant. 
Then from there, you build this whole bucket of citations, put them into a Google sheet, and then you want to start to build a marketing plan for the top citations. 
So look at the citations that are used across almost all these AI platforms. 
So if you see one particular URL is commonly cited over and over across all the AI platforms, that should be your number one priority because now we have overwhelming evidence that whatever that URL is that the AI continues to just use as it's one of its core feeding sources, let's call it, that means it's really important. Okay? 
And so you prioritize your whole list based on the citations that have the biggest presence across these platforms. Okay? And then from there, you just got to execute. 
You got develop marketing plan to actually go and get those brand placements. Now, here's the thing. 
It doesn't have to be you don't have to be a marketing genius to do this. 
All you have to do is reach out and just say paid collaboration. Do you accept sponsored posts? 
I'm interested in advertising. That is it. 
Just lead with money as the core value proposition and that is all you have to do because at the end of the day your brand getting mentioned it does not matter whether it's appears as an ad directly like it can literally be an advertisement that is equally as effective as it being organic okay there's no evidence that the AI discriminates in any way all that matters is that your brand is showing up in the core sources of retrieval








































































